Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are going to discuss sugar,
in particular, how our nervous system regulates
our sugar intake and our seeking of sugar.
We're also going to discuss how sugar
regulates our nervous system.
And as you'll soon learn,
sugar really impacts our brain and body
by two main mechanisms.
One of those mechanisms is based on the sweet taste
of sugar, which itself is rewarding.
Even if you're not much of a sweet tooth,
I confess I'm not,
most people enjoy sweet tastes more than bitter tastes.
And the sweet taste of sugar and its various forms
is strongly reinforcing,
meaning it triggers the activation of neurons,
nerve cells in the brain and body
that make us want to consume more of that sweet substance.
Incidentally, sweet tastes also make us want
to eat more of other substances as well.
You may be familiar with that phenomenon.
Now, sugar also triggers mechanisms in the brain and body
based on its nutritive content independent of its sweetness.
What that means is that the actual caloric content
and the way that sugar interacts with your nervous system
at a subconscious level without your awareness
also impacts your craving and seeking of sugar
and other foods.
Today, we are going to discuss what happens
when you ingest sugar in terms of your body's reaction
and your brain's reaction.
We're also going to talk about what happens
when you don't ingest enough sugar.
Because as it turns out,
sugar is such a powerful fuel for the brain
that under conditions where people don't ingest enough sugar
or where their so-called blood glucose,
which is basically blood sugar of a particular form
gets too low, their neurons don't function as well.
That said, there are conditions of very low blood sugar
in which neurons can function even better.
So today we're going to talk about the ins and outs,
the ups and downs of sugar
as it relates to your nervous system.
And by the end of this episode,
I'm confident that you have a much clearer picture
as to how much sugar you should be ingesting,
whether or not you should avoid sugars
that you're currently eating,
and you will certainly understand much, much more
about the energy and fuel sources that your brain relies on,
which I'm certain will allow you to make
better informed choices about the foods you eat and avoid
toward mental health, physical health, and performance.
I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events
this May.
The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington
on May 17th.
The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon
on May 18th.
Both are part of a lecture series entitled
The Brain-Body Contract,
during which I will discuss science and science-based tools
for mental health, physical health, and performance.
I should point out that while some of the material
I'll cover will overlap with information covered here
on the Huberman Lab podcast
and on various social media posts,
most of the information I will cover
is going to be distinct from information covered
on the podcast or elsewhere.
So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th,
Portland on May 18th.
You can access tickets by going to HubermanLab.com slash tour
and I hope to see you there.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Thesis.
Thesis makes what are called nootropics,
which means smart drugs.
Now, to be honest, I am not a fan of the term nootropics.
I don't believe in smart drugs in the sense that
I don't believe that there's any one substance
or collection of substances that can make us smarter.
I do believe based on science however,
that there are particular neural circuits
and brain functions that allow us to be more focused,
more alert, access creativity, be more motivated, et cetera.
That's just the way that the brain works.
Different neural circuits for different brain states.
And so the idea of a nootropic
that's just going to make us smarter all around
fails to acknowledge that smarter is many things, right?
If you're an artist, you're a musician, you're doing math,
you're doing accounting, a different part of the day,
you need to be creative.
These are all different brain processes.
Thesis understands this.
And as far as I know, they're the first nootropics company
to create targeted nootropics for specific outcomes.
They only use the highest quality ingredients,
which of course is essential.
Some of those I've talked about on the podcast,
things like DHA, ginkgo biloba, phosphatidylserine.
They give you the ability to try several different blends
over the course of a month,
discover which nootropics work best
for your unique brain chemistry and genetics and goals.
And with that personalization,
design a kit of nootropics that's ideal
for the different brain and body states you want to access.
I've been using thesis for more than six months now,
and I can confidently say that the nootropics
have been a total game changer.
My go-to formula is the clarity formula,
or sometimes I'll use their energy formula before training.
To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit,
go online to takethesis.com slash Huberman,
take a three minute quiz,
and thesis will send you four different formulas
to try in your first month.
That's takethesis.com slash Huberman
and use the code Huberman at checkout
for 10% off your first order.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens,
now called AG1.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still take Athletic Greens
once or twice a day is that it helps me cover
all of my basic nutritional needs.
It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have.
In addition, it has probiotics,
which are vital for microbiome health.
I've done a couple of episodes now
on the so-called gut microbiome
and the ways in which the microbiome interacts
with your immune system, with your brain to regulate mood,
and essentially with every biological system
relevant to health throughout your brain and body.
With Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins I need,
the minerals I need,
and the probiotics to support my microbiome.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
and claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
plus a year's supply of vitamin D3K2.
There are a ton of data now showing that vitamin D3
is essential for various aspects of our brain
and body health, even if we're getting a lot of sunshine.
Many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3,
and K2 is also important because it regulates things
like cardiovascular function, calcium in the body,
and so on.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs
and the year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed with a quality blood test.
What's unique about InsideTracker
is that while there are a lot of different tests out there
for hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera,
with InsideTracker, you get the numbers back
in terms of your levels,
but they also give you very clear directives
in terms of lifestyle, nutrition, and supplementation
that can help you bring those values into the ranges
that are best for you and your health goals.
And that's very different than a lot of the other programs
where you get a lot of information,
but you don't really know what to do with that information.
InsideTracker makes that all very easy to understand
and very actionable
based on the very easy to use dashboard at InsideTracker.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Okay, let's talk about sugar.
Let's talk about how sugar impacts your brain
and how your brain impacts your pursuit
or your avoidance of sugar.
Let's get a few things out of the way first.
The first thing is that there's nothing inherently bad
about sugar.
I know the word sugar gets a bad rap nowadays,
and indeed you're going to hear over and over again
during this podcast that consuming a lot of refined sugars,
in particular high fructose corn syrup,
is known to have a very large number of bad effects
on the brain and body.
I don't know that there's anyone
that really debates that anymore.
Even if we just agree,
and I think we should all agree on the so-called
calories in, calories out principle, right?
It's a principle of thermodynamics
that if we ingest more energy than we burn,
we are going to gain weight.
If we ingest less energy than we burn,
we are generally going to lose weight.
And if the two things are in balance,
ingestion and burning of energy,
well then we're going to maintain weight.
So everyone agrees on that.
I agree on that.
But beyond that, there are a number of ways
in which particular nutrients,
in the case of today's episode, sugar,
impact the way that the brain works,
such that we tend to seek out more of particular nutrients.
For instance, if we eat sugar,
there are two or at least two mechanisms
by which we will crave more sugar.
I think most people are aware of that experience,
but today I'm going to explain exactly how that works.
But also that when we ingest sugar,
it has a bunch of different effects
on the way that our neural circuits work
that can allow us to be more or less focused,
more or less agitated, more or less happy,
more or less depressed in some cases.
So today, as we explore this thing we're calling sugar,
we're going to explore that mainly in the context
of the nervous system,
but also in the context of how the nervous system regulates
many, many functions and behaviors
that are important to all of you.
Your ability to think, your ability to exercise,
your ability to gain weight, lose weight,
whatever your goals might happen to be.
Sugar plays a critical role in achieving those goals.
And in some cases, if you're ingesting too much
at the wrong times or the wrong forms,
sugar can actually impede those goals.
In fact, sugar can prevent all the right behaviors
from allowing you to achieve the goals that you want.
So today we are going to place sugar
into its proper context.
The way I want to start off by doing that
is to tell you a little bit of what happens when we eat
and a little bit of what the brain does
to respond to those events.
So what happens when we eat?
Well, I've done an entire episode on metabolism.
So if you're interested in the full cascade of hormonal
and neural events that occurs when we eat,
please check out that episode.
But for sake of today's discussion,
let's just take a, what I call top contour view
of the hormonal response to ingesting food.
Now, anytime we eat, that is the consequence
of a number of things that happened before we ate.
There's a hormone in our brain and body called ghrelin,
spelled G-H-R-E-L-I-N.
Ghrelin is a hormone that increases
depending on how long it's been since we ate last, okay?
So the longer it's been since we had a meal,
ghrelin levels are going to be higher and higher and higher.
And it essentially makes us hungry
by interacting with particular neurons
in an area of the brain
called the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus
and some other areas as well, like the lateral hypothalamus.
You don't need to know the names of those brain areas,
but if you'd like to know them, there they are.
Ghrelin increases, it tends to make us hungry.
And then when we eat,
typically what happens is ghrelin levels go down.
So it's a very logical system.
Now, when we eat, assuming that we eat carbohydrates,
but even if we just eat some protein and some fats,
we will experience a slight,
or in some cases, a large rise in blood glucose.
Blood glucose is simply blood sugar.
And the body and brain,
we should say particular the nervous system
doesn't function well if blood sugar is too high or too low.
So as a consequence, we have another hormone,
which is released from the pancreas,
which is called insulin,
which helps regulate the amount of glucose
in the bloodstream.
So even if you were to ingest an entire cup,
an eight ounce cup of pure table sugar,
which would send your blood glucose very, very high,
assuming that you have a normal insulin response,
that you're not diabetic,
that insulin response would help clamp
that blood glucose level
so that it did not cause damage to your brain and body.
Because if blood sugar goes too high,
it's actually toxic to neurons
and other cells of your body can kill them off.
And neurons of the central nervous system,
meaning the brain and spinal cord,
once they are dead, they do not come back.
So your biological systems understand this
at a biological level that is,
and prevent that death of cells due to high blood sugar
by keeping insulin around in order to clamp blood glucose.
Diabetics, we call them type one diabetics
who don't make insulin have to take insulin when they eat,
in particular, when they eat foods
that raise their blood sugar,
specifically to avoid that neurotoxicity
and the other deleterious effects of high blood sugar.
Okay, so ghrelin is a hormone that goes up
the longer it's been since we've eaten.
It tends to stimulate hunger.
When we eat, ghrelin is suppressed.
Blood glucose typically goes up,
especially when we eat a carbohydrate containing meal.
When blood glucose goes up, it's regulated in the body,
meaning its peaks and its valleys
are more or less smoothed out,
and that glucose is sequestered,
it's taken away where it needs to be taken away,
and in certain locations, it's delivered to cells
so that those cells can use the glucose.
Now, one of the chief organs for glucose utilization
is the brain.
Neurons are tremendously metabolically active,
and their preferred mode of metabolism is glucose metabolism.
In other words, neurons basically run on sugar,
which is not to say that you should eat a lot of sugar,
as you'll see today, there are states of mind and body,
for instance, fasted states,
in which people report having immense amounts
of mental clarity,
and their blood glucose is actually quite low.
So it is simply not the case
that the more sugar that you ingest,
the better that your brain will function,
but it is the case that for most people,
meaning people who are not on a ketogenic
or very low carbohydrate diet,
they're not adapted to low carbohydrate diets,
that neurons in their brain and body
are using glucose in order to function.
That's what allows those neurons
to fire electrical potentials,
that's how we refer to it, firing,
meaning sending electrical signals down their length
to communicate with other neurons.
To illustrate just how important glucose is
for brain function,
I'd like to describe a study that just recently came out
that sits on a long history of similar studies,
but the one that just came out is particularly interesting.
Now, I want to point out that unless I say otherwise,
I'm going to refer to typical diets,
meaning I have to believe that most people out there
are ingesting some starch or carbohydrate.
I do realize there are people
following very low carbohydrate diets
or moderately carbohydrate diets,
I even know that there's some folks out there
who are on the so-called carnivore diet,
they only eat meat and organs, maybe a little fruit,
but I'm going to assume
that the vast majority of people listening
ingest proteins and carbohydrates.
So unless I say ketogenic,
or I emphasize ketosis itself, which I will,
I'm referring to a kind of typical diet
where people are consuming fats, proteins, and carbohydrates.
I count myself as one such individual.
At some point, I might try the carnivore diet, who knows,
I might try a pure vegan diet, who knows,
but for my entire life up until now, I'm 46 years old,
I've been a proud omnivore, meaning I've tried
to eat high quality, as much as I can, unprocessed foods,
I try and really avoid highly processed foods,
but I do eat from those three macronutrient groups,
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats,
and I'm going to assume that most of you do as well.
The study I'd like to emphasize recorded from neurons,
nerve cells in the brain, in particular,
in the part of the brain that responds to visual images,
a so-called visual cortex,
and neurons in the visual cortex are beautifully tuned,
as we say, to particular features of what we see.
The primary example of this, the kind of classic example,
is if you put a little electrode next to a neuron
in your visual cortex, or if we put you
into an fMRI scanner machine,
which can detect neural activity,
and I were to show you a bunch of just little lines,
bars of light, they could be dark bars of light,
they could be light bars of light
on a screen in front of you, so some would be vertical,
some will be horizontal, some will be at 45 degrees,
what we would see is that some neurons respond best,
meaning they fire a lot of electrical activity
to vertical lines, other ones respond to horizontal lines,
and others respond to 45 degree lines.
And this so-called orientation tuning,
meaning because of the orientation of the line,
is a cardinal classic feature of the way
that your visual system is built.
And everything that you see, whether it's a face or a dog
or a cat or a landscape, is built up
from these very simple neuron responses.
In other words, when you look at a face,
there are neurons deep in the brain that respond to faces,
but the only reason that those neurons can respond
to those faces is because they receive signals
from neurons in your visual cortex,
some of which respond to vertical lines,
some of which respond to horizontal lines,
and some of which respond to 45 degree lines,
and all of those are built up
in what we call a hierarchical representation,
which is fancy language for it,
those are the building blocks by which you see a face
and you recognize a face.
And it's really an amazing phenomenon,
it happens very, very fast,
you never notice that you're doing this,
but everything is built up
from these fundamental orientation tuned neurons.
Now, orientation tuned neurons are so fundamental
that they are the building blocks
by which you make up all other things that you see,
it's the way you read,
it's the way that you recognize faces, as I mentioned,
and everything else.
Experimentally, it's quite straightforward
to measure how sharply tuned one of these neurons is.
In other words, if I were to show you a vertical line
and find a neuron in your brain
that responds to vertical lines,
I could also ask whether or not that neuron fires
any electrical activity in response
to a line that's not quite vertical,
maybe just 10 degrees off vertical,
or 20 degrees, or 30 degrees.
And what I eventually would find
is that that neuron was orientation tuned
over a particular range of angles,
it's not only going to respond to vertical lines,
it's also going to respond to lines
that are about 10 degrees off vertical in either side,
but probably not much more, maybe 20,
but usually it's going to be anywhere from vertical
to just tilted slightly, okay?
In the recent experiment
that was published in the journal Neuron,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal,
the authors asked a really interesting question.
They asked whether or not the sharpness of tuning,
the precision of orientation tuning of these neurons
is dependent on blood glucose level.
So just to cut to the chase, to give you the answer,
what they found is that when subjects are well-fed,
neurons that responded to vertical
responded very strongly to vertical,
but not very much at all to other angles
of what we call stimuli,
to lines that are 10 degrees or 20 degrees off.
If they looked at neurons that were primarily tuned, right?
That preferred horizontal lines,
they found the same thing, okay?
So it wasn't something unique to vertical lines.
What they basically found was the sharpness,
the precision of tuning of neurons in the brain
was best when subjects were fed.
And conversely, when subjects were fasted,
the orientation tuning of these neurons
became much broader.
What it meant was that a neuron
that normally would only respond to vertical
now responded to other angles of lines as well.
You might say, well, that's great, right?
These neurons that at one point could only do one thing
are now tuned to other things, but it's not so great
because what that means is that in the fasted state,
your perception of the outside world is actually distorted.
It's blurred, it's not as precise as it is when you're fed.
And when I say fed,
what I really mean is when glucose is available to neurons.
Now, for some of you, maybe many of you,
and including myself, intermittent fasting
or some variant thereof is actually a state that I like.
It allows me to focus.
For instance, as I mentioned before,
and even earlier in this podcast,
I tend to eat my first meal sometime around 11 a.m.
and then I generally eat my last meal
sometime around 8 p.m.,
plus or minus an hour on either side.
I'm not super strict about it.
On occasion, I'll wake up really hungry
and I'll eat something before 11 a.m.
I'm not super strict about this intermittent fasting thing.
It just seems to be how my appetite works best
given my schedule, et cetera.
In the morning, I tend to be most focused
and I always associate that with the fact that I was fasted.
I just water and some caffeine
about 90 minutes after waking up, I drink my caffeine,
but I hydrate from the time I get up, et cetera, et cetera.
And I know a lot of other people
have had the experience of being fasted
and feeling like they have a lot of mental clarity.
When you are in a fasted state,
typically you're going to use fuels
that are available to the neurons
based on your intake of food the day before,
maybe you're using some glycogen,
maybe you're using some fat,
maybe you're using some blood sugar
that's derived from other storage sites in the body.
You don't actually use fat as a fuel source for neurons
under typical conditions,
but there are ways in which proteins and fats
and glycogen, et cetera are converted
into fuel that neurons can use.
What's interesting about this study
is that the study says that when well fed,
meaning when blood glucose sugar
is at a properly elevated level in the bloodstream,
it can be delivered to the brain
in a way that allows neurons to work best,
which is really all just to underscore
the point that I made earlier,
which is that your nervous system
is extremely metabolically demanding and it loves glucose.
Neurons love glucose.
So the takeaway from this study
is not that you should avoid fasting.
The takeaway from this study
is that there are elements of the fasted state,
in particular the elevations
and things like epinephrine and norepinephrine,
also called adrenaline and noradrenaline,
that can give us this kind of clarity of mind
that many people are pursuing when they fast.
That's kind of one of the reasons a lot of people fast.
They like the way that they feel mentally and physically.
But I think it's only fair to point out
that glucose is the preferred source of fuel
for the brain.
And this study that I mentioned
is one of many studies that have explored
how nutritional status or blood glucose status
in the brain and body influence
neuronal tuning and neuronal function.
And it really points to the fact that ultimately,
your brain as an organ is a glucose consuming machine.
Now, when you eat a food, that food is broken down
and if it contains carbohydrates,
it's going to be converted into glucose.
And that glucose can't get directly
into the brain as a fuel source.
It actually has to be carried
across the so-called blood brain barrier, the BBB.
And the actual metabolism of glucose
and the delivery of the glucose to the neurons
is carried out by a different cell type.
And it's a cell type that you should all know about
because it's the most abundant cell type in your brain
and maybe even in your entire nervous system.
And that's the so-called astrocyte.
Astrocytes are one of several types of glia.
The word glia means glue,
but many people have taken that name glia,
glue, to think that, oh,
the only thing that the astrocytes are doing
is just kind of holding things together.
Actually, the astrocytes are involved
in delivering glucose to the neurons.
They are critically involved
in shaping your neuronal function and brain plasticity,
the brain's ability to change in response to experience.
So these astrocytes are like the little waiters
and waitresses bringing glucose to the neurons
and the neurons are going to do the heavy lifting
that's involved in perception and behavior and action.
So if prior to this episode,
you didn't already realize that glucose,
blood sugar, is vital to the function of your brain
and other neurons of your nervous system, now you know.
And for those of you that have experienced
the increase in mental clarity
that comes after a properly timed,
properly composed,
meaning it has the right macronutrients
and the right ratios and the properly sized meal,
well, then now you have justification
for eating something as a way
to improve the way that your brain works.
It turns out that your brain is going to work best
when it's got glucose available.
Whether you like to fast or not,
that's just the reality of things.
The same thing is also true for the neurons in your body.
The way that you are able to move the limbs of your body,
the way that you are able to perform exercise
or movement of any kind for that matter,
is because neurons called motor neurons
send electrical potentials to the muscle fibers.
They release a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine,
which causes contraction of the muscle fibers
and allows you to move your limbs.
Those neurons are also very metabolically demanding,
especially when you're doing
demanding types of physical work.
And that could be cycling or running or weightlifting
or yoga or whatever it may be.
Those neurons require a ton of glucose.
If you've ever had the experience
of having to think very hard
about how you're generating a movement
or force yourself to continue to endure in a given exercise,
you might've thought, oh, you know, I'm running out of fuel.
That's why I'm getting tired.
It's hard to do.
That's actually the case sometimes,
but that's not always the case.
One of the reasons that it feels like work
is because your so-called upper motor neurons,
the one that control the lower motor neurons
in your spinal cord, which control your muscles,
they have to be very metabolically active.
It's one thing to engage in a reflexive movement
where you're just walking around
or if you're running continuously,
but when you suddenly have to focus on what you're doing
and you have to generate specific patterns
of motor movement, well, that feels demanding
because one, it increases the release of adrenaline
in your brain and body,
this makes you feel a little bit agitated and more alert,
but also deliberate thought,
deliberately controlling the way that your brain and body
is moving requires more glucose uptake,
more energy in those very neurons.
And this is also why after doing a long bout of exercise,
you might be tired,
but also if you do a bout of skill learning of any kind,
or if you've been reading and thinking
about what you're reading,
or if you had a intense conversation with somebody
where you're really forcing yourself to listen
and hopefully they're listening to you too
and you're really trying to parse what they're saying
and maybe you're doing that right now
and you're trying to really track something,
that's work and that work requires glucose uptake
by neurons both in the brain and in your body.
Now that we've established that glucose
is the preferred source of fuel for the nervous system,
I'd like to concentrate on a few of the other types
of sugars that we ingest on a common basis
and the impact that those have on brain function
and body function.
I'd particularly like to focus on fructose.
Fructose of course is found in fruit.
It's also found in the infamous high fructose corn syrup,
which we will talk about today.
It's worth pointing out that the concentrations
of fructose in fruit is quite low compared
to the concentrations of fructose in high fructose corn syrup.
High fructose corn syrup is approximately 50% fructose,
which turns out to be an enormously high percentage
of anything really, especially when we contrast that
to the concentrations of fructose in fruit.
Fruits have other types of sugars in them as well.
The sucrose content of most fruit and fruit juices is low,
although there are some fruits like melons, peaches,
pineapples, and so forth that contain a little less
than 10% or so of sucrose.
Things like mangoes can have a lot of sucrose,
but typically the amount of fructose,
fructose I think is the proper pronunciation
that people are always correcting me, fructose,
is anywhere from 1% to about 10%, right?
It's really going to vary quite a bit.
And many of you have probably heard
of the so-called glycemic index,
which is basically a measure of how fast blood sugar rises
after eating particular foods, et cetera.
We're going to set aside the glycemic index for now.
We will come back to it.
It has some relationship to the concentrations
of fructose in fruit,
but the point that I'd like to make is that fructose
as a sugar is handled very differently in the body
than is glucose.
But I also want to emphasize that because the percentage
of fructose in fruit is rather low,
especially compared to high fructose corn syrup,
many people have demonized fructose saying
that fructose makes you fat or that fruit makes you fat.
If you look at the data, that's not really the case.
The fact of the matter is that the concentrations
of fructose and fruit are so low
that unless someone is consuming a lot of fruit
or they're consuming a lot of fruit
on the backdrop of a highly processed diet
or a diet that has a lot of other stuff
that they might not want to be ingesting,
you can't really say that fructose is fattening.
I don't really think that there's any basis
for saying that fructose itself is bad.
Now, high fructose corn syrup is a different issue
and too much consumption of anything but fructose included,
whether or not it comes from fruit or otherwise,
can be a problem for the ways that it impacts
the neural circuits that process sugar,
not just glucose, but fructose.
And so we'll illustrate those neural circuits in a bit
and it will become very clear to all of you,
regardless of whether or not you have a background
in biology or metabolism, nutrition or otherwise,
why ingesting very high concentrations of fructose
is not going to be a good thing
for the way that your brain functions.
One of the key distinctions between glucose and fructose
is that fructose most likely cannot directly access
the brain, it actually needs to be converted
into glucose in the liver.
And the way that conversion occurs,
feeds back to a set of hormones and neural pathways
that we talked about earlier,
which have a lot to do with appetite.
And to just summarize what is now a lot of very solid data,
fructose and specifically fructose has the ability
to reduce certain hormones and peptides in our body,
whose main job is to suppress ghrelin.
As you recall, ghrelin is a hormone that increases
the longer it's been since we've eaten
and ghrelin makes us hungry
by stimulating particular neurons in our hypothalamus.
It actually makes us really want to eat
and in particular really makes us want to eat
sugary and fatty foods.
Fructose reduces the activity of the hormones
that reduce ghrelin.
And so the net consequence of that
is that fructose increases ghrelin.
So although I, and I think pretty much everyone out there,
say for a few individuals,
agrees that calories in, calories out
is the fundamental principle of weight loss,
weight maintenance or weight gain,
ingesting fructose shifts our hormone system
and as a consequence, our neural pathways within our brain,
the hypothalamus, to be hungrier,
regardless of how many calories we've eaten, okay?
Now, I also want to be absolutely clear.
This does not mean that eating an apple
or eating a melon or eating a couple of apricots
or something is going to make you hyperphagic,
meaning it's going to make you just want to eat
and eat and eat.
That's simply not the case.
But if you compare fructose and you compare glucose,
not only are they metabolized differently
in the brain and body,
but in addition to that,
fructose has this impact of reducing the hormones
that reduce hunger hormones and neural circuits.
And so fructose does have this kind of twist
in its phenotype, right?
Or it's, I guess if fructose had a dating profile,
this would be a kind of a red flag in that profile.
Because fructose itself,
while it's actually a pretty good fuel source in many ways,
and it's often packaged in things like fruits,
which bring along fiber and vitamins and minerals
that I think for many of us are things
that we should be eating more of and ingesting more of,
it can suppress the pathways that suppress hunger.
And as a consequence, it can increase hunger.
So current recommendations for most people
are to eat more fruits and vegetables.
But for those of you that are trying to control your hunger,
ingesting a lot of fructose
is probably not going to be a good idea.
Certainly ingesting it from high fructose corn syrup
is not going to be a good idea
because of the enormous percentages of fructose
in high fructose corn syrup, 50% or sometimes even more.
But even from fruit,
some people will find that fruit
really quenches their appetite.
Other people will find that fruit stimulates their appetite.
And I suppose if you're trying to stimulate your appetite,
then ingesting more fruit
might actually be advantageous to you.
So fructose provides a bridge for us
between a particular kind of sugar, hormone function,
in this case, ghrelin and the hypothalamus,
which leads us to the next question,
which is what is it about sugar
that makes it such an attractive thing for us?
Why do we like it so much?
And the obvious answer that most people arrive at is,
well, it just tastes really, really good,
but that's actually not the way it works.
The rewarding properties, as we say, of sugar,
whether or not they come in the form of sucrose or fructose
or foods that increase glucose to a very high level,
actually is not just related to the taste of the foods
that produce that elevation in glucose, sucrose, or fructose.
It is in part, but that's only part of the story.
And the rest of the story, once you understand it,
can actually place you in a position
to much better control your sugar intake of all kinds,
but also your food intake in ways
that can allow you to make much better choices
about the foods you ingest.
And actually, at this point,
I should probably give a confession.
I've said today, and I'll say it again,
and I've said it on previous podcasts,
I don't have much of a sweet tooth, and indeed, that's true.
And I can kind of pass on chocolate or ice cream
or things like that.
It seems like with each successive year,
sweet things are less and less appealing to me.
Of course, savory foods,
anything that is really fatty, salty, savory,
those don't last long in my presence.
But I always say I don't really like sweet things so much,
and I like sweet people,
but I don't tend to like sweet foods,
which is true, but there's probably one exception,
and that's mangoes.
And it turns out that mangoes have the highest percentage
of sugar in them, in particular fructose,
as well as other forms of sugars.
So what I do, because I love mangoes so much,
is I will have mangoes probably twice a week,
but I'll have them after some sort of resistance training
or hard run or something like that,
because it is the case that after you exercise hard,
in particular exercise that is of the high intensity variety
that your body is more efficient
at using circulating blood sugar.
It's able to store that or use that for fuel.
And so what I'll typically do is just take the mango,
actually eat the peels too.
I know there are probably some people are going to cringe
when they hear that.
I find them delicious,
so I just bite into those things like apples.
I don't eat the pits, however.
So now I want to take us on a journey
into the nervous system to explain the pathways
in the brain and body that regulate our appetite for sugar.
Now, keep in mind what I already told you before,
which is that when we ingest foods,
they're broken down into various components
and glucose is going to be shuttled to the brain
and of course, to other neurons in our spinal cord
and elsewhere and to our muscles, et cetera,
in order for all of those cells and organs and tissues
to be able to function.
The fact that so many cells and organs and tissues
require glucose in order to function
has led to a situation where you have dedicated
neural machinery, pieces of your brain
that are almost entirely, if not entirely devoted
to seeking out of sugar or foods that contain sugars
and to make sure that you not only seek those out,
but you know where those foods are
and that you ingest more and more and more of them.
And there are two main ways that these neural circuits work.
In fact, we can say that there are two neural circuits
entirely that work in parallel.
And this is a common theme throughout the nervous system
and that's parallel pathways.
Parallel pathways are the ways
that you can distinguish light from dark.
Parallel pathways are the ways that you can distinguish
high-pitched sounds from low-pitched sounds.
Parallel pathways are the ways that you can flex your muscles
versus extend your muscles.
For instance, if you move your wrist
closer to your shoulder, you're flexing your bicep
and you're actually inhibiting,
you're actually preventing the action of your tricep.
If you move your wrist away from your shoulder,
you are essentially using your extensor, your tricep,
and you're inhibiting the activity of your bicep.
So for every function in your body
that you might think is controlled by one brain area
or one neural circuit, almost always,
there are two or more so-called parallel pathways
that ensure that that particular behavior happens.
Now, in the case of sugar consumption,
the two parallel pathways involve one pathway
related to the actual taste and the perception
of sweet tastes that lead not just you,
but every animal that we're aware of
to seek more sweet-containing foods.
The other parallel pathway is related
to the nutritive component of sweet foods,
meaning the degree to which a given food
will raise blood glucose.
I want to repeat that.
One pathway in your brain and body
is devoted to getting you to seek out sweet-tasting things
that you perceive as sweet,
and another parallel pathway is devoted
to getting you to seek out foods
that lead to increases in blood glucose.
It just so happens that the foods
that lead to big increases in blood glucose
typically are associated with that sweet taste.
Now, this is distinctly different
than the neural pathways that control seeking
of savory foods or salty foods or spicy foods,
for that matter, or bitter foods.
The sweet pathway is what we would call hardwired.
It exists, as far as we know,
in every mammal that even exists in fruit flies,
hence fruit fly.
Basically, getting sweet stuff into the body
might seem like it has a lot to do with the taste,
but it has just as much to do
with the nutritive components that sweet-tasting foods carry
and the fact that your nervous system
and so many cells in your brain and body run on glucose.
If you recall earlier, I said,
even if you ingest fructose,
fructose can be converted into glucose in the liver.
And I mentioned, of course,
that fructose may actually work directly on the brain.
That's still unclear for humans.
The jury's still out on that.
We will see.
But the fundamental thing to understand here
is that when you think you want a piece of chocolate
or you think you want a piece of cake
or you're craving something sweet,
you are both craving the taste
and your neurons are literally craving
the nutritive components that arrive with that taste.
And simply by understanding that can allow you
to circumvent some of the sugar cravings
that you might otherwise be a complete hopeless victim to.
Also in this episode, I will talk about ways
that you can sort of undermine or short-circuit
these circuits, if you will,
in order to reduce sugar cravings on a regular basis,
if that's your goal.
Two parallel pathways.
One of the parallel pathways has to do
with conscious perception.
So animals of all kinds, mice, rats, and humans
will prefer sugary taste to non-sugary taste.
When we eat something that tastes sweet,
we register that sweet taste by way of sweet receptors,
literally little ports or portals of neurons
on our tongue and on our palate.
A lot of people don't realize this,
but there are a lot of taste receptors on the soft palate
and around the mouth, so on the sides of the mouth.
So you're actually tasting things,
not just with your tongue,
but with your entire mouth and your palate.
So when you ingest something sweet,
very quickly there are signals sent
from those neurons in your mouth
to brain areas that cause you to seek out
or at least pay attention to the source
and the abundance of those sweet things.
They literally change your perception.
In fact, there are beautiful neuroimaging studies
that show that when people ingest a sugary drink,
their perception of images of foods change very much
to make those foods appear more appetizing
and not just foods that contain sugar.
Results of those studies do show that there's an increase,
for instance, in the perception of detail
and images of ice cream after you ingest a sweet drink
or even put like a hard candy into your mouth,
it will make you seek out sugary things more,
it will make sugary things look more appetizing,
but also other foods more appetizing.
So I think it's important that people recognize that fact
that when you have a sweet taste in your mouth
or when you've tasted something sweet within your mouth,
I should say, your perception of food
has immediately shifted.
These are fast neural pathways,
then we'll get into some of the brain structures
in a moment, but these are fast neural pathways
that shift your entire self
toward seeking more sugary stuff and more food generally.
Now, does that mean that you should
never ingest anything sweet?
No, certainly I'm not saying that.
Everyone has to decide for themselves
what the appropriate amount of sugar intake is,
but I find it remarkable when people say,
oh, you know, I need to get my sugar fix
or I need to have my chocolate
or I need to have a little bit of something
to just kind of take care of that sugar appetite
because in taking care of that sugar appetite,
maybe for the very disciplined of you,
you can just have that one piece of chocolate
and it's great and you can relish in it,
but it does shift the way
that you perceive other foods as well.
And the way it does that is through our,
probably if you're a listener to this podcast now,
old friend, but incredible neuromodulator dopamine.
Dopamine is a molecule that is released
from several places in the brain.
There's a so-called mesolimbic reward pathway,
which is a whole set of places in the brain or circuits
designed to get us motivated
and craving and in pursuit of things.
And then of course,
there are areas of the brain that are involved in movement
that are linked up with those areas involved in motivation.
That makes perfect sense.
Why would you have a brain area involved in motivation
if you couldn't actually do something with that motivation?
So the way that your brain is designed
is when there's an increase in dopamine
in the mesolimbic reward pathway,
there are signals sent to an area of the brain
called the striatum.
We're going to spend a little bit of time today
in the striatum.
It's got a dorsal part, meaning an upper part,
and a ventral part, which means a lower part.
And the dopamine sent to those areas places us, excuse me,
into modes of action to pursue particular things.
Sugar or sweet tastes, I should say to be more specific,
have an incredibly potent ability
to activate dopamine release
within the mesolimbic reward pathway.
This has been shown over and over and over again
in animal models and in humans.
This is especially true, I should mention,
through the ingestion of sweet liquids.
Now, this becomes a very important point to us
a little later on when we talk about the proliferation
of sodas and sweet drinks,
and dare I even say non-sugar or diet sodas.
We're going to get into that a little bit later,
perhaps one of the most third rail topics in nutrition.
But when we ingest something sweet,
the perception of that sweet taste increases dopamine
in the mesolimbic reward pathways,
which then are conveyed to pathways for motor behavior,
and in general, place us into modes of focused action
toward getting more of whatever was sweet.
Again, for those of you that are very disciplined,
you can probably eat that one piece of chocolate
and be just fine.
But if you understand the way that dopamine works,
what you'll realize is that when this dopamine pathway
is triggered, it tends to create not the sensation
or the perception of satiety,
of feeling like something is enough,
but rather to produce the sensation of wanting more.
As described in the episode that I hosted
with my phenomenal colleague
from Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Anna Lemke,
she's an expert on addiction and dopamine pathways.
The dopamine circuits of the brain
have what we call a pleasure pain balance.
And there I'm paraphrasing what Dr. Anna Lemke has said
and has written about in her beautiful book,
''Dopamine Nation.''
If you haven't read that book, I highly recommend it.
Whether or not you have issues with addiction
or you know people that do, or you don't,
it's an incredibly important read,
especially if you're interested
in understanding motivated behaviors
and ways to channel your behaviors in life
toward healthy motivated behaviors
and make sure that you avoid some of the common pitfalls
that people fall into, not just addiction,
but things like overuse of social media
or wasting time in general, it's a phenomenal book.
In that book and of course, within research articles,
you will find evidence of this so-called
pleasure pain balance that exists
within our dopamine circuits.
Nobody has dopamine circuits that allow them
to escape this pleasure pain balance.
And the way this works is that any time
that we engage in a behavior or we ingest something
that increases our levels of dopamine,
there is a subsequent increase in the neural circuits
that control our sense of frustration, pain, and lack.
And you can actually notice this phenomenon.
If for instance, you're somebody who really likes chocolate
or you really like something else,
pay attention to the way that you experience
indulging in that thing.
If you eat that piece of chocolate
and you really focus on savoring its amazing taste,
you'll notice that it provides some quenching
of your desire for let's say sweet stuff
or chocolate or both.
But right as you stop experiencing that,
right as that chocolate intake tapers off,
as you swallow it down your throat
or you just pause for a second afterwards,
what you'll notice is that your brain and body
actually orient toward wanting more.
And that wanting of more is really the action
of the neural circuits that underlie pain
and are pushing your dopamine levels back down.
And when these circuits go awry,
or I should say when people fail to control themselves
within the context of that pleasure pain balance,
the typical behavior is to reach for yet another chocolate
or to then look for something that will quench that desire
and get dopamine levels back up.
Now, the way these pleasure pain circuits work
is very diabolical because it turns out
that were you to take another piece of chocolate,
yes, your dopamine levels would go back up,
but not to the same extent that they did
the first bite of chocolate that you had.
In fact, we can say that the longer it's been
since you've indulged in something that you really enjoy
or would like, the greater the dopamine you will experience
when you finally engage in that behavior
or indulge that thing, ingest that thing,
and the greater the dopamine increase,
the greater the subsequent action of those pain circuits.
So this puts you on a very complicated seesaw.
It's a very wobbly precarious state to be in,
which is not to say you shouldn't have a piece of chocolate.
It's just to say that the sweet taste of sweet things,
in particular things that we crave very much
and we wait and wait and wait,
and then we allow ourselves to indulge,
those trigger changes in our neurochemistry
and our neural circuits that place us
in a very vulnerable place
to either want more and more of that thing
or to seek out other ways to fill that kind of emptiness
that we feel or that gap like, oh, I would love more,
but I'm not going to allow myself more.
Now, again, I'm not saying
that you shouldn't pursue pleasurable things.
I mean, this molecule dopamine exists for a reason.
It's the, frankly,
because of its involvement in sex and reproduction,
it's the reason we're all here in the first place,
because last time I checked,
the only way any of us got here was one way or another,
sperm met egg and there was conception.
I still believe there are no exceptions to that
that I'm aware of anyways.
That is a process where I should say
the events leading up to that process
typically involve dopamine in one way or another.
There are exceptions to that too, but you get the idea.
These dopamine pathways are not evil, they're not bad,
but once you understand the way they work,
you can leverage them to your advantage
as opposed to them leveraging you to their advantage.
Okay, so when you ingest something sweet,
you perceive that sweet taste and a cascade ensues
within your brain that makes you want more
of the sweet thing.
That's the conscious pathway for sugar perception,
for sweet perception.
Now there's the second pathway.
The second pathway is what's called
the post-ingestive reinforcing properties of sugar,
which is really just a fancy nerd speak way of saying,
there are events that happen within your stomach
and below your conscious detection
that are also driving you to seek out sweet tasting things
independent of their taste
and foods that increase blood glucose
independent of their taste.
In order to illustrate the immense power
of these subconscious circuits for sugar seeking,
I'd like to describe an experiment.
And this is just one experiment of many,
of dozens or more experiments done in animal models
and humans, which essentially illustrate the same thing.
And as I described this experiment,
I think you will come to understand
the power of these circuits.
I'll provide a link to this study in the caption.
The first author is Freeman.
The paper was published in Frontiers in Bioscience,
but there have been others, papers in Nature Neuroscience,
papers in Neuron, Cell Press Journals, et cetera,
many, many journals, many, many papers.
If subjects are given the choice of drinking plain water
or a sweet tasting fluid,
their preference for the sweet tasting fluid
is much, much higher, right?
Sweet things taste better than plain water,
at least for most people and certainly for animals.
Now, if for instance, you take an animal
which completely lacks sweet receptors,
and you can do this through some molecular genetic tools
and gymnastics in the laboratory,
we call these knockout mice
where you can knock out a particular receptor
for sweet taste.
You can confirm that there's no perception of sweet things
or at least no preference for sweet things
in those animals.
In humans, you can numb the mouth.
There are other pharmacologic ways
that you can eliminate sweet receptors in the mouth.
And by doing that, people will tell you,
no, I can't taste anything sweet.
It's just, you could give them an ice cream,
you could give them pure sucrose,
you give them table sugar,
and they wouldn't be able to perceive it as sweet.
If you eliminate the perception of sweet taste in the mouth
and you offer people or laboratory animals water
versus some sugar containing solution,
you eliminate the preference for the sugary solution,
which tells us that the perception of sweet
is important for the preference for sweet tasting drink.
This is also true for sweet tasting foods,
I should mention.
However, in both animal models and in humans,
after about 15 minutes,
subjects start preferring the sugary water,
even though they can't taste that it is sweeter.
So to repeat that,
if you eliminate the ability to sense sweet,
to perceive sweetness in foods,
then you eliminate the preference for sweet beverages
or sweet foods.
So that's not surprising.
But if you wait about 15 minutes,
the preference for the sweet beverage
or the sweet food comes back.
Now that doesn't mean that they can perceive the sweetness.
In fact, the way these experiments are done is very clever.
You offer people various cups of different things
or different food items,
and then you just look at what they eat more of
or what they prefer to eat more of.
So this experiment is so crucial because what it says
is that the preference for sugar containing foods
is in part due to the sweetness of those foods,
but in part due to something else.
And this something else is what we call
the post-ingestive effect.
And as I mentioned before, it took about 15 minutes.
And you've actually experienced this,
whether you realize it or not,
this phenomenon of post-ingestive rewarding properties
of sweet foods,
meaning what happens in your body when you ingest something
that increases your blood glucose very much
has no doubt controlled you from the inside
below your awareness.
This was happening to you and you didn't realize it.
And here's how it works.
We all have neurons within our gut.
These neurons have a name.
They are called neuropod cells.
Neuropod cells were famously discovered
by professor Dr. Diego Bajorquez at Duke University.
And these cells respond to, among other things,
to the presence of sugar within the gut.
So when we ingest a sugary food or drink,
or we ingest a food or drink that simply contains
fructose, sucrose, glucose, or some other form of sugar
that later through metabolism
will be converted into glucose,
the neuropod cells are able to register the presence
of those sweet or glucose stimulating foods.
And in response to that, send electrical signals,
because electrical signals are the way neurons communicate,
up to the brain via the so-called vagus nerve.
The vagus nerve, of course, being a nerve pathway,
famous for its role in relaxation.
That's kind of the assumption out there
that it's always involved in relaxation.
That's not the case.
It's involved in a lot of things besides relaxation,
but nonetheless, these neuropod cells send
electrical signals through a particular highway
within the vagus to the so-called nodose ganglion.
This is a cluster.
A ganglion is just a cluster of neurons.
And then the nodose ganglion sends on information
to the nucleus of the solitary tract.
The nucleus of the solitary tract is an area of the brain
that we're going to talk about extensively today.
It's very important for understanding sugar preference.
These neuropod cells also trigger activation
of dopamine pathways within the mesolimbic reward pathway.
In other words, there are signals conveyed from the gut,
meaning stomach and intestines, to the brain
anytime we ingest sweet foods,
but it has nothing to do with our perception
of them being sweet.
It has everything to do with the fact
that sweetness of food is almost always correlated
with an ability to increase blood glucose.
And the net effect of this is a parallel pathway
by which dopamine is increased further.
Now, the experiment that I described before
of animals or humans ingesting something
that contains sugar,
but not being able to perceive its sweetness,
and yet after a period of time,
still preferring that food or drink
to non-sugar containing food or drinks,
even though they can't distinguish their tastes,
is dependent on these neuropod cells and related pathways.
What this means for you
is that anytime you eat something sweet,
that substance is actually causing your gut,
your stomach and your intestine,
or to be more precise, I should say,
that food substance is causing the neuropod cells
in your stomach and intestines
to send a parallel set of signals up to your brain saying,
eat more of that, or simply eat more,
eat more, eat more, and preferably eat more sweet foods.
So we've all heard of hidden sugars,
meaning the sugars that manufacturers have put into foods
and disguise them with other flavors.
I talked about this in the episode on salt,
using salt to mask the taste of sweetness
so that people ingest more sugar.
That is not an accident that hidden sugars
are often hidden with salt or with other flavors.
It's done so that people will, meaning you or me,
will want to ingest more of a particular food
independent of how sweet that food tastes.
And in fact, some crackers, for instance,
chips, for instance, you might think,
oh, well, you know, chips, they're not sweet,
they're salty and savory.
Again, I'll mention I love salty savory foods,
including certain foods.
I love kettle chips, for instance,
that I try not to walk by them in the grocery store.
I usually have to eat one bag while I'm in the store
and then another later.
The savory foods are often laden with these hidden sugars
that we can't register as sweetness,
but trigger the neuropod cells,
which then further trigger dopamine,
which make us want more of them.
Now, we may be able to resist eating more of them,
but it makes us crave more food in general.
Now, we will talk about ways to regulate this pathway,
to sort of intervene in this subconscious pathway.
But for now, I'm hoping that just the understanding
that we all have this pathway,
this is hardwired into our body,
could potentially allow people to better understand
why is it that their cravings are so intense,
that it's not necessarily just about the taste of that food.
And when you consider this in concert with the fact
that we have this dopamine pain pleasure balance,
excuse me, that I referred to earlier,
you start to realize that there are multiple mechanisms
hardwired into us that make it especially hard
to not eat the sweet thing
or to not eat the food that we're craving.
And indeed, that's the case.
We have two major accelerators.
It's like a car with two accelerators,
and we will talk about the brakes,
but two ways that really get us into forward motion
toward pursuing the consumption of sweet foods.
Now, if it doesn't already seem diabolical enough
that sweet things that we perceive as sweet
make us want to eat more of those because of dopamine
and then send us down this pain pleasure pathway
that I mentioned earlier,
and the fact that we have this subconscious circuit
coming from the neuropod cells in our gut
that are registering the presence of sugar
or glucose increasing foods in our gut
and sending those signals to the brain
for yet more dopamine pain pleasure challenges,
there's a third layer to this whole thing.
And that has to do with how sugar is metabolized
in the brain, or I should say how glucose is used.
Without getting into too much detail,
some of the more beautiful studies of neuroimaging
and evaluating which brain areas are active
when we eat certain foods were done
by Dr. Dana Small's lab at Yale University
and in some of her previous work when she was elsewhere,
and of course, by other laboratories too.
And they used an approach called
positron emission tomography,
and they and others have used PET scanning,
as it's called, positron emission tomography,
along with a tool called 2-Deoxyglucose.
2-Deoxyglucose is actually involved
in the procedure of seeing which brain areas are active
when people eat foods or engage in other types of behaviors.
But the way that 2-Deoxyglucose sometimes shorten 2-DG,
the way that it works is to block glucose uptake
from neurons and instead bring along with it
a marker that one can see through imaging.
So in other words, a tool for looking at what parts
of the brain are active when eating particular foods
actually prevents foods such as sugar
from allowing glucose to get into particular neurons.
Now, that might seem like a bad situation.
You'd say, well, wait, you're trying to understand
how sugar works in the brain,
and then you block the ability for sugar glucose
to bind to or be used by these neurons
because of the thing that you're using for the experiment.
Exactly, it's a huge problem,
but it turns out to be a huge problem
that led to a great insight.
And the great insight is this.
The preference for sweet tasting foods and liquids
is actually blocked by 2-Deoxyglucose.
What that means experimentally,
but also in terms of what it means for you and me
in the real world is that there's yet
a third parallel pathway that's related
to the use of blood sugar, the use of glucose by neurons
that further reinforces our desire to eat more sweet things.
And the preference for sweet foods
can actually be eliminated through 2-Deoxyglucose.
Now, I definitely don't want people going out
and consuming 2-Deoxyglucose.
This is a laboratory tool.
It is not something that you should be ingesting.
So don't go look it up and try and get some.
There might be other uses for it, but that's not the point.
The point is that it is the sweet taste of sugary foods.
It is the signals coming from your gut,
from your digestive tract to your brain.
And it's the use of the metabolic consequences
of sugary foods that are acting as a three-pronged push
on your desire to consume more sugary foods.
So this car analogy that I used before
where it's some weird car that has two accelerators,
it actually has three accelerators.
And so with three accelerators,
all pushing the system hard, we can say,
wow, there must be something really special
about this pathway.
And indeed there is.
This pathway is the quickest source of fuel for the brain
and the rest of the nervous system.
It's the preferred source of fuel
for the brain and nervous system.
And I realized, as I say that,
all the ketonistas are probably going,
no, actually ketones are the preferred source.
Okay, I acknowledge that.
There are conditions under which
you can bring your blood glucose very low,
and there are reasons to do that.
Actually ketosis has been a terrifically successful
treatment for a lot of forms of epilepsy,
in particular, pediatric epilepsy.
Many people do derive benefit from ketogenic diets,
so I'm not knocking ketogenic diets,
but if you were to look at what neurons normally prefer,
meaning in a typical diet regimen, it would be glucose.
And the fact that fructose
is eventually converted to glucose,
the fact that when we ingest sucrose,
it's eventually converted into a fuel that neurons can use,
that's very much in the glucose pathway.
What you basically arrive at is the fact
that your nervous system is a glucose consuming machine,
and you've got at least three pathways
of which I've described that are pushing on your brain,
consciously and subconsciously,
to get you to seek and consume more sugar.
Now that all sounds like a pretty depressing picture,
at least for those of you that are trying
to reduce your sugar intake.
And of course, we can all reduce sugar intake
by way of sheer will.
We can not have those foods at home.
We can restrict ourselves from those.
But there are some things that we all can
and perhaps should do in order to regulate these pathways,
such that we don't feel so controlled by them,
but rather that we control their output.
And of course they are us and we are them.
So this gets into all sorts of issues of consciousness
and free will that I certainly don't want to cover
in this episode.
But nonetheless, I think once you understand
that these circuits exist,
and you understand that there are simple substitutions
and modifications that one can make to their food intake
that can work within these pathways
and even bypass some of these pathways,
you start to realize that you have a lot more control
over sugar intake and sugar appetite
than you previously thought.
Now, many of you have heard of the so-called glycemic index.
The glycemic index is a measure
of how quickly blood sugar rises
after ingesting particular foods
and very broadly speaking,
we can say that there are low glycemic index foods
of less than 55 typically is the measurement
or medium glycemic index foods,
which go from about 55 to 69
and then so-called high glycemic foods, which are above 70.
And of course there's additional nuance
related to glycemic load
and many more features of the glycemic index.
A couple of things to understand
about how the glycemic index is measured.
And then I'd like to just briefly talk about
how the glycemic index can be leveraged
to short circuit some of the neural circuits
that would otherwise lead us to crave
and perhaps even ingest sugary foods.
First of all, measurements of glycemic indices of food
are typically made by having people
ingest those foods in isolation.
And in general, we can say that anytime we ingest fiber
and or fat lipids along with a particular food,
it will reduce the glycemic index of that particular food,
either the absolute level of blood glucose
that a particular food causes
or the rate at which that elevation in blood glucose occurs.
And this is why there are some
seemingly paradoxical aspects to sweet stuff
in terms of the glycemic index.
For instance, ice cream has a lower glycemic index
provided it's ice cream that includes fat,
which I hope it would
because that's the good tasting ice cream in my opinion.
Compared to something like mangoes or table sugar, right?
So the glycemic index is not something
to hold wholly in most cases
because most people are not ingesting foods in isolation.
And there's actually a lot of argument
as to whether or not the glycemic index
is really as vital as some people claim.
There's also the context in which you
ingest particular foods.
As I mentioned earlier,
after I do hard training of any kind,
meaning training that ought to deplete glycogen,
so hard resistance training,
I actually make it a point to ingest
some very sweet high glycemic foods like a mango.
I'll also ingest some starches
because I'm trying to replenish glycogen.
I'm also trying to spike my blood sugar a little bit
because that can be advantageous
in terms of certain strength
and hypertrophy protocols, et cetera.
But most of the time I'm avoiding these high glycemic foods
and high sugar foods.
I should point that out.
Now, why am I telling you about the glycemic index?
Well, if we zoom out and take our perspective
on all of this discussion about the glycemic index
through the lens of the nervous system,
and we remind ourselves that neurons prefer glucose
for energy and that all sweet things
or things that we perceive as sweet,
but also sweet things that are ingested
and registered by those neuro pod cells in our gut
trigger the release of dopamine
and trigger these neural circuits
to make us want to eat more of these foods.
What we start to realize is that
a sharp rise in blood glucose
or a very high degree of elevation in blood glucose
is going to be a much more potent signal
than will a more moderate rise in blood glucose
or a slower rise in blood glucose.
So if we think about the analogy of three accelerators,
meaning three parallel neural circuits,
all essentially there to get us to seek out
and consume more sweet tasting and sugary foods,
well then the glycemic index is sort of our measurement
of how hard we are pushing down
or how fast we are pushing down on those three accelerators.
And so those of you that are trying to reduce sugar intake,
and you want to do that through an understanding
of how these neural circuits work,
and you want to short circuit some of the dopamine release
that's caused by ingesting sugary foods,
it can be advantageous to ingest sweet foods
either alone or in combination with foods
that reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic load.
So that might mean making different food choices.
So paying attention to sweet tasting foods
that can satisfy sugar cravings,
but do not have as steep,
or I should say do not cause
a steeper rise in blood sugar,
or it could mean consuming other foods
along with sweet foods in order to reduce
the glycemic index and thereby slow
or blunt the release of dopamine.
You might think, well, why would I want to do that?
I want the maximum dopamine output
in response to a given sweet food.
I don't just want the level 10,
I want the level 100 output of dopamine,
but you really don't because of the pleasure pain balance
that dopamine causes.
And in fact, if we consider some of the non-food substances
that really push hard on these dopamine pathways,
we can come up with a somewhat sinister,
but nonetheless appropriate analogy.
The drug cocaine causes very robust potent increases
in dopamine within the brain,
and typically causes people to want to ingest more cocaine
because of those sharp increases in dopamine.
But within the category of the drug cocaine,
there are various modes of ingestion.
Some people inhale it,
some people will inject it intravenously,
some people will smoke it.
And those different forms of taking cocaine
actually impact the dopamine circuits differently.
And it turns out that crack cocaine,
the smokable form of cocaine rock,
increases dopamine to a very high degree,
but also very, very quickly.
And it is the sharp rise in dopamine over time,
not so much the absolute level of dopamine
that makes crack cocaine so absolutely addictive.
So sometimes you'll hear, you know, sugar is like crack.
Well, that's getting a little extreme
because even though I don't think the measurements
have been done in the same experiment,
I think it's reasonable to think
that the absolute level of dopamine
caused by ingesting sugar, at least for most people,
is not going to be as high as the absolute level
of dopamine caused by smoking crack.
Of course, it goes without saying,
please don't do cocaine in any form, by the way.
It is appropriate to say
that the rate of dopamine increase over time
has a profound effect on how people will
and if people will go on to want to pursue more
of what caused that increase in dopamine.
So what I'm basically saying is
if you're going to ingest sweet foods
in order to satisfy a sweet craving,
ingesting sweet foods for which the glycemic index is lower
or in which you've adjusted those glycemic index foods
through the co-ingestion of fiber or maybe fat
might be beneficial.
So is this justification for putting peanut butter
on that piece of chocolate or for having a bowl of ice cream
along with the mango that you're craving?
In some sense, yes.
However, there's also the issue of how sweet
and how delicious something tastes.
Highly palatable foods, absolutely delicious foods,
trigger that one neural circuit, that one accelerator
that we're talking about in terms of our analogy
of three accelerators.
And the more delicious something tastes within our mouth,
the further increase in dopamine.
So if you really wanted to adjust your sugar cravings
and you really still want to ingest some sugary foods,
you probably would be better off combining fiber
with that sugary or sweet food.
Now, I do realize that it's somewhat unusual
and you probably get some strange stares
if you decided to consume broccoli, for instance,
along with your chocolate or with another dessert
that would otherwise cause a steep increase in blood sugar
and has a high glycemic index.
But nonetheless, if your goal is to blunt
your sugar cravings, what you really need to do
is blunt that dopamine increase.
So what we're really talking about here
is trying to reduce the dopamine signal
that is the consequence of ingesting sweet foods.
And we're talking about doing that
through these different parallel pathways,
not just by preventing sweet taste,
but also by preventing the post-ingestive effects
of sweet foods.
And of course, the backdrop to all of this
is that most of us, again, most of us, not all of us,
should probably be ingesting fewer refined sugars.
Certainly there are exceptions to that,
but I think the bulk of data point to the fact
that ingesting these highly palatable,
certainly highly palatable, highly processed foods
or foods that contain a lot of high fructose corn syrup
can be really deleterious to our health,
especially in kids.
And I'm not going to cite off a bunch of statistics.
You've all heard them before that for hundreds of years,
we ingested the equivalent of a few cups
or pounds of sugar per year.
And now people are ingesting hundreds of pounds
of sugar per year.
The major culprit always seems to be sugary drinks,
meaning soft drinks.
And I think indeed that's the case.
I do want to point out the incredible work
of Dr. Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist
at University of California, San Francisco,
who was really early in the game of voicing the dangers
of so-called hidden sugars and highly processed foods.
There are other people, of course, now talking about this.
His laboratory has done important work showing,
for instance, that if high fructose corn syrup
or even just fructose is replaced with glucose,
even if the same number of calories is ingested,
that there are important,
meaning significant reductions in type two diabetes,
some of the metabolic syndromes associated
with high fructose corn syrup and on and on and on.
And of course there are other culprits in type two diabetes.
There are other factors that are going to lead to obesity,
but I think the work from Lustig and others
has really illustrated that we should all be trying
to reduce our intake of highly refined sugars
and high fructose corn syrup,
and certainly trying to reduce our intake
of very sugary drinks, not just soft drinks,
but also fruit juices that contain a lot of sugar.
Now, even for people that are of healthy weight
and who don't have metabolic syndromes,
there may be an additional reason
to not want to ingest very sweet foods
and highly refined sugars.
And this has to do with a new and emerging area
of nutrition neuroscience.
And I want to point out that these are new data, right?
So it's not a lock.
The double-blind placebo-controlled studies
in large populations have not been finished.
So I want to make sure that that's clear,
but I also want to make clear
what some of the really exciting data
coming from Dana Small's lab at Yale
and from other laboratories are showing.
And this has to do with what's called
conditioned taste preference.
Using a kind of Pavlovian paradigm,
what they do is they have people,
and these studies were done in people,
ingest maltodextrin, which increases blood glucose.
Doesn't have much flavor,
but even if it does have a little bit of subtle flavor,
the maltodextrin is cloaked by some other flavor.
And by cloaking it with that other flavor
or pairing it with that other flavor,
what they find is that over time,
because the maltodextrin increases blood glucose
and they're ingesting a particular flavor
along with that maltodextrin,
they can then remove the maltodextrin
and the flavor will induce an increase in insulin.
The increase in insulin, of course,
is the consequence of the fact
that anytime there's a rise in blood glucose,
provided the person isn't diabetic,
there's a parallel increase in insulin.
Now, this is very interesting because what it says is,
well, at a first pass, it says that we are very Pavlovian
in terms of our physiological responses to foods
and particular flavors come to be associated
with particular patterns of blood glucose increase
and hence patterns of insulin increase
because of course insulin manages glucose in the bloodstream,
as I mentioned earlier, this also has implications
for understanding things like artificial sweeteners.
And here, I want to highlight that this is still
very controversial work and needs more data,
but nonetheless, I'd like to share it
with you for consideration.
The small laboratory has done studies in humans,
both in adults and in children,
showing that if the flavor of artificial sweeteners
is paired with maltodextrin,
and then the maltodextrin is removed,
that the artificial sweetener taste itself
can subsequently increase insulin in the bloodstream.
In other words, taking something that increases blood sugar,
attaching a flavor experience to that,
having children or adults ingest that thing,
allows the nervous system to associate that flavor
with that increase in blood glucose,
but then you can remove the glucose increasing substance
and the flavor alone will increase insulin
because insulin typically follows blood glucose.
So this is a conditioning effect.
Now, the reason these data are controversial
is several fold.
First of all, the landscape around the discussion
around artificial sweeteners is definitely
what I would call a barbed wire topic.
And I want to preface what I'm about to say next
by saying I actually ingest artificial sweeteners.
I will have the occasional diet soda, not every day,
maybe, I don't know, once or twice a month.
I don't particularly like the taste,
but I'll do it just because it's around
and I want some caffeine and I like the carbonation
if I'm on a plane or something.
I do ingest plant-based non-caloric sweeteners.
To my knowledge, there have not been high quality studies
of plant-based non-caloric sweeteners
in the context that I'm referring to here, okay?
Nonetheless, these studies show that particular flavors
can be conditioned to cause an insulin increase
and the flavor associated with certain artificial sweeteners
is included in that category of flavors
that can induce insulin even in the absence
of something that can increase blood glucose.
Now, the simple takeaway from these studies
would be the following.
And this is actually the one interpretation
that Dana Small has offered to her data,
but she offers other interpretations as well.
One interpretation is that if people are going to ingest
artificial sweeteners and they do that along with foods
that very sharply increase blood glucose,
then there is the potential, highlight the potential
for those same artificial sweeteners to increase insulin
even in the absence of food.
In other words, let's just draw the scenario out
in the real world.
You're having a diet soda
along with a cheeseburger and fries.
You do that every day for lunch, okay?
This somewhat extreme example, but natural world example.
You do that every day for lunch
and then you just have a diet soda alone.
The extreme interpretation of the data
that they've collected says, well,
that diet soda alone will increase insulin
even though there's no increase in blood glucose
because you haven't ingested food with it
because you conditioned that taste of artificial sweetener
to the experience of a rise in glucose and hence insulin.
Now, the counter argument to this would be,
well, that's a very unusual situation.
Maltodextrin causes big increases in blood glucose,
so that's not really a fair experiment
or it's not a natural world experiment.
And I think that's a decent assessment,
although I will point out that one of the reasons
why this study is so controversial
or why these data are so controversial
is that the experiment actually had to be stopped
and particularly the experiment in children
had to be stopped because the changes in insulin
that were observed early in the study were so detrimental
that the institutional review board quite appropriately
said, we can't do this to these kids.
They're experiencing these odd shifts in insulin
that are not healthy for them
when they're just ingesting artificial sweeteners
in the absence of these glucose increasing foods.
So once again, I do ingest artificial sweeteners.
I'm not saying that they are dangerous.
I'm not saying that they are not dangerous.
I'm saying that you have to decide for yourself.
In previous episodes, I've highlighted
that artificial sweeteners have been shown
in studies of animals that when given in very high doses,
sucralose in particular,
there can be fairly robust disruption to the gut microbiome,
which is vital for immune health and brain health,
et cetera, et cetera.
But thus far our knowledge of how artificial sweeteners
negatively impacts or positively impacts, I should say,
the microbiome and other deleterious effects on the body
has mainly been explored in animal studies.
Again, the work by Dana Small has been done in humans.
There's some parallel work by others in animal models.
I bring it up today to illustrate the following point.
Normally we have a pathway
that we don't have to condition at all.
It's there from birth,
whereby ingestion of sweet foods
causes increases in dopamine.
And there are parallel pathways
by which neurons in our gut and elsewhere in our body
trigger further increases in dopamine.
So there's no need for a conditioned response
or to become Pavlovian about this, right?
You're hardwired to want to eat sweet things
by at least two and probably three parallel pathways.
Now, the work from Dana Small's lab and others
that have illustrated this condition flavor preference,
I think beautifully show that any flavor
that's associated with a glucose spike
or a long sustained increase in glucose
can also be conditioned.
In other words, the circuits for dopamine
that reinforce the desire to eat particular things
is not unique to the sugar pathway.
And this is one of the reasons, I believe,
why ingestion of sweet foods
doesn't just lead us to want to eat more sweet foods.
I think that is absolutely clear
based on animal data and on human data.
I think that's robust.
It's actually the stuff of textbooks now, but in addition,
ingesting sweet foods and or foods that raise blood glucose,
but that we don't perceive as sweet.
So for instance, foods with hidden sugars,
sugars that have been masked by salty or spicy tastes
increases our desire for glucose elevating foods
and food generally.
I think that's the only logical interpretation of the data
that I can arrive at.
So for people that struggle with regulating their appetite
or with regulating their sugar appetite,
I think the understanding of conditioned flavor preference
while a little bit complicated ought to be useful
in trying to navigate reducing sugar cravings
and sugar intake.
As a segue into tools to control sugar intake
as a means to both regulate sugar intake itself,
as well as food intake overall
and steer us towards healthier choices.
I'd like to talk about some of the special populations
out there that might want to be especially wary
of having a dysregulated sugar appetite system.
And the group I'm referring to specifically
are those with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
or I should say, and or people who have issues
with focus and attention generally.
And I think more and more nowadays,
I'm hearing that people are having a hard time focusing.
This probably has something to do with our interactions
with electronic devices.
As I always say, if a picture is worth a thousand words,
a movie is worth a million pictures,
and the fact that we can access so many movies
in just by scrolling with our thumb
is something that the nervous system
has just never contended with before in human history.
I'm confident in that.
And it's not that it can't deal with it.
The question is, what's the trade-off?
You know, what are the consequences of that?
So attention and ability to focus
is obviously key to success in school,
success in relationships,
success in the workplace and success in life.
We could probably even go so far as to say
one's ability to succeed in anything
is proportional to one's ability to focus
and then deliberately defocus
when the time comes to defocus, right?
Because we all need rest and we need to disengage
and then re-engage.
If you look at the sum total of the meta-analyses
and the clinical data on ADHD and nutrition,
you arrive at a pretty clear answer,
which is that sugar consumption,
in particular highly refined sugars,
is just not good for people with ADHD
or with attentional issues.
Now, as I say that, I also want you to recall
the earlier study that I referred to
whereby the tuning of neurons in the brain
is highly dependent on glucose.
So this doesn't mean consuming no glucose
is going to be a good idea.
It doesn't mean that the ketogenic diet
is necessarily the best diet for ADHD,
although there are some people pursuing that
and exploring that.
And we'll do yet another episode on ADHD at some point
that goes a little bit deeper into that
because there's some new data.
I did do a very long and fairly extensive episode on ADHD.
You're welcome to look that up if you like
in our archive, excuse me, in our archive
at hubermanlab.com.
It's all timestamped.
So, you know, because a number of people said,
oh, you know, it's an episode on ADHD
and you made it two and a half hours long.
Yes, we did because we wanted it to be as comprehensive
as we could at the time, but it is timestamped.
So you can just jump to the particular topics of interest
in their short little cassettes there.
Now, if you'd like to know upon what I'm basing
the statement that sugar consumption
and highly refined sugar consumption
is potentially bad for ADHD,
basing this mainly on the conclusions
of a really nice paper,
the title of the paper is sugar consumption,
sugar sweetened beverages
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
a systematic review and meta analysis.
And this is a paper, we'll put a link to this
in the caption.
This was publishing complimentary therapies in medicine,
which is a bit of an atypical journal in some sense,
but I really like this meta analysis.
The sum total of this meta analysis is really that
when especially kids get beyond four sugary drinks per week,
so four sodas of, you know, typical 12 ounce soda,
when they get past four 12 ounce sugary sodas,
they didn't, as far as I know,
look at artificial sweetened sodas.
That's when you start to see
a shift towards more negative outcomes,
more symptoms of existing ADHD.
Now where the controversy comes in
is whether or not sugar consumption
can actually trigger or cause ADHD.
And I don't think we can conclude that at all at this time.
And this review, if you decide to check it out,
review slash meta analysis, I should say,
if you decide to check it out,
goes into some of the nuance around that.
What's also interesting in terms of ADHD and sugar intake,
and probably has relevance to all of us,
is that they also cover some of the interesting data
showing that supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids
can actually be beneficial for people
and particular kids with ADHD.
I've talked before about the utility of omega-3s
that's been shown in various studies
that have compared omega-3 fatty acid intake
to say prescription antidepressants, like SSRIs,
like Prozac, Zoloft, and similar, fluoxetine.
And the results of those studies are pretty clear,
at least to me, that provided that one gets
at least one gram of EPA essential fatty acids,
so it's not just getting one gram per day,
but one or more grams per day
of the EPA form of essential fatty acid
can rival some prescription antidepressants
and or decrease the amount of antidepressants
that's required to take,
which for a lot of people can be a very useful thing
because of the side effect profile
of many of those antidepressants.
Of course, talk to your psychiatrist, talk to your doctor,
but the omega-3s are no doubt powerful.
And then of course, there's a whole story
about omega-3s and heart health.
And of course, like anything else,
there's some controversy around omega-3s,
but I think the data are clear enough to me
around mood and cardiovascular health
that certainly I personally ingest them,
but as always, I always say,
anytime you're going to add or remove anything
from your nutrition, supplementation, exercise,
or otherwise your lifestyle,
definitely consult with a board certified physician.
I don't just say that to protect me.
I say that to protect you.
You are responsible for your health ultimately.
So omega-3 supplementation has been shown
to be beneficial for ADHD.
Why am I talking about this in the context of an episode
on sugar and the nervous system?
Well, if you remember those neuropod cells,
those cells in your gut that respond to sugar
and send signals up to the brain
to cause the release of dopamine,
well, it turns out that neuropod cells
also respond to amino acids and to fatty acids,
in particular, essential fatty acids.
So the cells that we call neuropod cells have three jobs.
One is to detect levels of sugar in the gut.
The other is to detect levels of amino acids
and to detect levels of particular essential fatty acids
and communicate that information to the brain.
And I should point out,
when I say communicate that information,
they're not actually saying, hey, there's amino acids here,
or hey, there's sugar here,
or hey, there's essential fatty acids,
because the language of these cells is somewhat generic.
It's just the firing of electrical potentials.
But that's the key point.
It's generic and all three, or any of those three,
sugar essential fatty acids or amino acids
will trigger these neurons to signal to the brain
to increase dopamine.
And it is not coincidental
that omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
can help ameliorate some of the symptoms of ADHD
by way of presumably increasing dopamine
in this neuropod to dopamine pathway
that we talked about earlier.
The whole thing has a very nice logical structure to it
and points to, yet again,
the immense value of bringing the proper amounts,
maybe even supplementing the proper amounts
of omega-3 fatty acids
and the proper amounts of amino acids into the gut
as a way to supplant some of the stimulation
of these pathways that would otherwise be caused by sugar.
There's actually a version of this where one could say,
if you want to reduce sugar cravings,
you might consider increasing certain forms
of amino acid intake or certain forms of fatty acid intake.
So what are some ways
that we can reduce our sugar cravings?
And ideally, ways that we can do that
that also benefit us in other ways,
both nutritionally and from the neuroscience standpoint?
Well, these neuropod cells that respond to
and signal the brain when we ingest sugar,
as I mentioned, also respond to amino acids
and essential fatty acids.
We already talked about the essential fatty acids.
I make it a particular point to ingest anywhere
from one to three grams, that's grams,
of EPA essential fatty acid per day.
I make it a point to do that
with the ingestion of high quality omega-3s.
For me, the simplest way to do that,
and I think for most people,
the lowest cost way to do that
is to use some liquid form of fish oil
or some capsule form of fish oil.
You really do have to see how much essential fatty acid
in the form of EPA is in those.
If you try and do that only through capsules,
it can get kind of expensive,
depending on which particular brands you use.
Some have more EPA, some less.
You can, of course, also do this through foods.
You can do this with non-fish sources,
through things like algae, and there's some other forms.
You can look it up online now,
plant-based sources of EPAs.
You can do this with high quality fish oil.
In any case, that does seem,
at least based on a modest amount,
but nonetheless solid literature,
to reduce sugar craving somewhat,
but that could easily be by mere replacement of calories.
So we don't know yet, based on human studies,
whether or not the ingestion of those EPAs
is specifically activating the neuropod cells,
which specifically activates dopamine release
and bypasses the need for, or the craving for sugar.
We don't know that yet,
but logically it holds up to assume that.
The fact that these neuropod cells,
and I should say other neurons within the gut,
respond very robustly to the presence
of particular amino acids is also a potential lever
by which one could reduce sugar cravings.
And there's an interesting literature
around the amino acid glutamine,
in particular supplementing with the amino acid glutamine,
as it relates to sugar cravings,
and certainly as it relates to other aspects of the gut,
in particular leaky gut.
The use of supplemental glutamine
to try and treat leaky gut is not a new phenomenon.
There are other approaches too, of course,
but there are many people who are experimenting
with supplementing with glutamine several grams per day,
often even five grams distributed
through three or four different servings throughout the day
as a way to blunt their sugar cravings.
Now, there has not yet been a large-scale clinical trial
using glutamine to reduce sugar cravings,
but the results of the few studies that I looked at,
as well as my understanding of the logic
of these neural circuits, including the neuropod cells,
brings us to a conclusion that it makes sense
why if there's a population of neurons within our gut
that responds very robustly to the presence of sugar,
fatty acids, or amino acids,
that the intake of particular amino acids
would allow the dopamine pathways
that might otherwise be triggered by sugar
to be triggered by something like glutamine,
which has very few or no calories.
And in fact, having talked about this previously,
a number of people that I know went out and tried this.
Now, this is, of course, is what I call anecdata, right?
This is not a quality peer-reviewed study.
This is anecdata.
Many of them have reported back that they actually feel
as if their sugar cravings are reduced.
I know some people who actually take glutamine
and mix it with full fat cream
and take it kind of like a shot of full fat cream,
which sounds absolutely delicious, by the way.
Glutamine is a little bit chalky,
so it's not that great tasting to ingest with sugar.
I should mention, if you do try and take this approach
of ingesting glutamine to reduce sugar cravings,
you want to increase the amount of glutamine
that you take somewhat gradually.
It can create some gastric distress.
If you just, you know,
I certainly wouldn't take a big tablespoon of it,
throw it in water and chug it down three times a day.
Some of you with very hearty stomachs
can probably tolerate that.
You know, if you're like my, you know, my bulldog,
which unfortunately passed away, but Costello,
I always imagined that if ever we did an autopsy on him,
he'd have like a license plate
and like a human being in his gut,
because it seemed like he could ingest anything
with no issues.
But of course, many people have kind of sensitive guts.
So if you're going to try taking glutamine
as a means to reduce sugar cravings,
just know that the studies are still ongoing.
Some people have achieved benefit.
Please also realize that there's an entire literature
devoted to the potential hazards of increasing glutamine
if you have a preexisting cancer.
So if you have cancer or you're cancer prone,
I would really discourage you from this approach.
And in any case, as always, talk to your doctor.
The logic nonetheless is there,
why increasing amino acid intake or fatty acid intake
might decrease sugar craving.
Now, there are other ways to reduce sugar craving,
and there are certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise
in blood glucose that can occur
when we ingest sugary sweet foods,
or even just an abundance of carbohydrate foods.
And there are a huge number of these things.
I'm going to sort of layer up through the ones
that you might find in your cupboard or at the grocery store
and then get into some of the more extravagant,
or I should say esoteric ones.
Many of which, however, can be quite potent.
The first of which is simple lemon juice, right?
Or lime juice.
There was an old lore and actually some papers
pointing to the idea that the ingestion of vinegar,
either white vinegar or wine vinegar
could somehow blunt blood glucose
after the ingestion of sugary foods
or the ingestion of a lot of carbohydrate foods
or even just a big meal.
Actually, Tim Ferriss, I should say the great Tim Ferriss,
because I do have great respect for the fact
that he seems to be about 10 years ahead of everything,
both in terms of nutrition and skill learning
and things of that sort.
Some of the things that he predicted in his books,
the four hour body and the four hour chef
actually turned out to be true based on scientific data,
some of which only exists in the animal models,
but now also some predictions that played out to be true
in both the animal models and the human model.
So I think that Tim certainly deserves a hat tip
for the fact that he experimented with these methods
and reported his experiences with those methods
and that now some of them,
many of them have been validated
by what I perceive to be quality science.
He talked about the fact that,
at least in his experiments on himself,
the ingestion of vinegar did not seem to blunt blood glucose
and he was using continuous glucose monitors.
These incidentally, another example
of where Ferriss was early to the game
and the rest of us are kind of just in his wake,
he talked about the use of blood glucose monitors.
Those I think at the time were implanted below the skin.
Nowadays, they're less invasive blood glucose monitors,
things like levels and so forth,
and these are actually becoming pretty popular.
I've worn one of these before,
they're actually pretty informative.
I learned, for instance, that when I go in the sauna,
that I experienced a sharp rise in blood glucose
and that makes sense because of the dehydration
associated with being in the sauna,
a lot of sweating, the concentration of sugar
in the bloodstream goes up.
So there's some other things that certain foods
affect my blood glucose one way or another.
It's kind of an interesting and fun experiment
that some of you might be interested in doing as well.
Regardless, there are now data pointing to the fact
that lemon juice and lime juice,
a couple of tablespoons or so,
if ingested before or even during
or even after consumption of sugary foods,
or I should say foods that sharply increase blood glucose
or large carbohydrate meals
can actually blunt the blood glucose response.
And I did see that when I did my own experiments on myself
with continuous glucose monitor, it was kind of fun
to do those experiments.
I preferred to do those experiments
by eating somewhat larger meals of things
that didn't contain a lot of sugar.
I saw some big increases in blood glucose
in certain instances.
And then I would ingest some lemon juice or lime juice,
typically mixed in with water.
And sure enough, you could see a blunting
of the blood glucose response.
And of course, this was real time blood continuous,
hence continuous blood glucose monitoring.
So for those of you that are interested
in blunting your blood sugar response, certain foods,
that's a simple low cost way to do that
if you want to explore it.
I will say if you are fasting
and you already have low blood glucose
and you ingest lemon juice,
or I should say it's some lemon juice and water
or lime juice and water,
be careful because you can actually become hypoglycemic,
for the very same reasons that lemon juice and lime juice
can blunt blood glucose
when your blood glucose levels are moderate to high.
You can also reduce blood glucose levels even further
when blood glucose levels are low.
Now that's lemon juice and lime juice there,
but we can't say that has to do with acidic things generally
and just as a side point,
many of you have probably seen in the store,
so-called adjusted pH waters or foods and drinks
that are supposed to adjust your pH.
Hate to break it to you,
but your pH is very tightly regulated
throughout your brain and body.
You do not want this to change.
It is entirely impossible,
at least in any safe way,
that you would become quote unquote more alkaline
by ingesting an alkaline water or something like that.
It is true that your pH, your alkalinity and acidity
varies in different compartments in your body.
That's important.
Unless you are hemorrhaging or vomiting
or there's something badly wrong with you health-wise
and you're in a really dire circumstance,
you don't want big shifts in your body pH
and your body has all sorts of ways
of buffering against changes in pH.
So I encourage you not to fall on the,
or hop on the bandwagon of adjusting pH
and becoming less acidic and that kind of thing.
When you ingest lemon juice or lime juice,
the mechanism by which it blunts blood glucose
is probably twofold.
One is probably through the post-ingestive effects
of glucose in the gut,
meaning the way in which sugars are interacting
with neurons and other components of your gut circuitry
to impact things like gastric emptying time,
to impact things like the firing of those neuropod cells
and their signaling to the brain.
But almost certainly it has something to do
also with the perception of sour taste on the tongue.
We didn't go into this too much today,
but you of course don't just have sweet taste receptors
in your mouth, you also have bitter taste receptors,
you have salty taste receptors,
you have sour taste receptors in your mouth
and on your, and of course,
that means your tongue and palate,
and those are interacting.
If you ingest a substance that's just sweet
or mostly sweet, that causes a certain set of effects
on your blood glucose, but also your brain,
dopamine and the other neural circuits of your brain.
If you also ingest something that's sour,
like lemon juice or lime juice,
it adjusts the output of those neural circuits
in your brain.
So again, we have a situation,
we have two parallel pathways.
One that's post-ingestive coming from phenomenon
within our gut, neurons,
but also things like gastric emptying time,
the clearance and the transfer of food
and the conversion of food into particular nutrients
and the circulation of glucose in your bloodstream
and how it gets into the brain,
but also simply by ingesting something sour,
you are changing the way that sweet things
impact your brain.
And so I think it stands to reason that the lemon juice,
lime juice effect is not going to be magic.
It's going to have everything to do with the way
that ingesting sour foods can adjust the taste,
excuse me, can adjust the neural response
to taste of sweet foods.
And in fact, we know based on the beautiful work
of Charles Zucker at Columbia Medical School,
that that's exactly what happens.
They've measured the activity of neurons
at various locations in the so-called taste pathways
of the brain.
And they found that when particular tastes
like just sweet or just bitter or just sour
evoke certain ensembles of neurons to fire
in particular sequences,
when sweet and sour are co-ingested,
when bitter and sour are co-ingested,
you get distinct ensembles,
meaning distinct patterns of activity of those neurons
and of course, distinct patterns of downstream activity
within the brain and body.
So while it is still somewhat mysterious
as to how exactly things like lemon juice and lime juice
can reduce our blood glucose spikes
when we ingest those with sweet foods
or carbohydrate-laden foods or with big meals,
you can use this as a tool with the understanding
that there's a grounding in the biology
of the way these circuits work.
Now, some of you have probably heard that cinnamon
can be a useful tool for controlling blood sugar.
And indeed that's the case.
It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust the rate
of glucose entry into the bloodstream,
possibly by changing the rate of gastric emptying.
It might slow the rate of gastric emptying
and thereby also reduce the glycemic index
of particular foods.
So I suppose if I were going to eat a mango
and I hadn't just done a bunch of hard training,
I might sprinkle some cinnamon on it here.
I always enjoy kind of coming up with new ideas
of ways that I can eat foods during these podcasts.
In any event, there's some debate out there.
If you look online as to whether or not
Saigon cinnamon, Cassia cinnamon,
excuse me, or Ceylon cinnamon is best
for purposes of blunting blood glucose spikes.
But I think the, at least by my read of the data
and from what I found, it doesn't really matter
provided it's real cinnamon.
And you have to actually look and make sure
that it's real cinnamon because a lot of cinnamon
that you buy is not real.
I do want to provide a cautionary note
about cinnamon however.
Cinnamon contains something called Coumadin,
which can be toxic at high levels.
So you don't want to ingest more than about a teaspoon,
maybe a teaspoon and a half of cinnamon per day
because you'll start to exceed the threshold
at which cinnamon could start to be problematic.
But certainly if you're going to have a big meal
or a meal that has a lot of sugar in it
or a lot of carbohydrate laden foods
and you don't want an increase in blood glucose,
you could put cinnamon in a beverage,
you could put cinnamon on food
in order to blunt that blood glucose increase,
reduce the glycemic index
by way of reducing gastric emptying time.
Again, just making sure that you don't get out past
that one and a half teaspoons per day
because you really don't want to start dealing
with any of the toxicity related to Coumadin.
So we've talked about lemon juice and lime juice
and cinnamon, these are kind of commonplace
in many kitchens.
Then of course we can venture into the more esoteric
or I would say the more advanced tools
for adjusting sugar intake.
And the one that comes to mind is of course berberine.
Berberine is a derivative of tree bark
and is a very, very potent substance
for reducing blood glucose.
So much so that is on par with metformin or glibenclamide
which are prescription drugs specifically used
to reduce blood glucose.
So using berberine is a serious step,
you should absolutely talk to your doctor about it.
I know of a number of people that use it
to lower blood glucose when they eat really large meals.
I know the number of people that are using it
to get to some of the other effects of metformin
that people have discussed, things like activating
or tapping into the so-called AMPK pathway, reducing mTOR.
These are people that are aiming their activities
at increasing longevity,
a somewhat controversial approach still
but I know many people are doing it.
It is true that if you ingest berberine
your blood glucose will plummet.
And I point that out because I've actually tried it before,
it gave me brutal headaches and I felt really dizzy
and I felt like I couldn't see straight
and actually I couldn't see straight.
Why did it do that?
Well, it made me hypoglycemic,
it actually drove my blood glucose down too far.
And the reason it did that is that I took berberine
on an empty stomach, I know some people can tolerate it.
I would say be very cautious about ingesting berberine
on an empty stomach or if you are in a low carbohydrate diet
unless you really know what you're doing
and you have a medical professional
to kind of guide you through that.
If I took berberine along with a very large meal
that include a lot of carbohydrates,
I can recall the days in which Costello and I
would eat a couple of pizzas
and then we might get ice cream, that kind of thing.
Then I felt perfectly fine on even up to 750 milligrams
or a gram of berberine.
It has a kind of unique property
of making you feel not overwhelmed
by the amount of blood glucose increase
that you're experiencing from eating a big meal.
I don't quite know how else to describe it.
It's almost as if you can keep eating
and eating and eating.
And of course you have to protect
your gastric volume, right?
I mean, you only have so much space
in your stomach to ingest food.
I wasn't using it to gorge on food.
I just heard about it.
I was interested in experimenting with it.
I don't have any chronic blood sugar issues,
but again, when I took it on an empty stomach,
it made me hypoglycemic on a low carbohydrate intake,
hypoglycemic, not a good experience.
And again, an experience I think to avoid,
but provided there's a lot of glucose in your bloodstream.
And certainly if you are of the experimental type
or you're trying to regulate blood glucose,
berberine might be a good option.
But again, talk to your doctor.
It does have some other interesting effects
in terms of lowering total cholesterol
that are research supported
of reducing insulin a little bit.
Well, that's not surprising.
If you reduce blood glucose,
you're going to reduce insulin
because of course insulin manages blood glucose
in the bloodstream.
So I would place berberine
and of course metformin and glibenclamide
in the kind of the heavy hitting potent tools
for regulating blood glucose.
Now, this is an episode not about sugar per se,
but sugar viewed through the lens of the nervous system.
And what's interesting about berberine,
metformin, glibenclamide and related substances
is that some of the effects are of course
on gastric emptying or buffering blood glucose
within the bloodstream, et cetera.
But there appear to also be some neural effects
of having chronically low glucose
or blunting blood glucose through things like berberine.
And some of those neural effects
include longstanding changes in the hormonal cascades
that are the consequence of having low blood sugar
and thereby changes in the neural circuits
that manage blood glucose overall.
The simple way of saying this
is that by maintaining low to moderate blood glucose,
either by not ingesting heavily carbohydrate-laden foods,
so here I'm speaking to the low carb
and to the ketogenic types,
or by blunting blood glucose
through things like metformin or berberine,
even if ingesting carbohydrates, maybe even some sugars.
Over time, it seems that there's a adjustment,
what we call a homeostatic regulation of the neural circuits
that control things like sugar craving.
And indeed, some people report
feeling fewer sugar cravings over time.
Now, I didn't use berberine for a very long period of time.
I've never used metformin.
I have experienced a somewhat odd but welcome phenomenon
of with each progressive year of my life,
I have fewer and fewer sugar cravings.
Why that is, I don't know.
I suspect it might have something to do with my sleep,
and I'll talk about that in a few minutes.
But if you're going to explore berberine
or metformin or otherwise,
in addition to working with a doctor,
I think you should understand why you're doing it, right?
I think that many of the effects can be quite potent.
They can happen in both the immediate term,
in terms of regulating blood glucose.
They can send you hypoglycemic if you aren't careful.
They can also cause longstanding changes
to the neural circuitry that regulates blood sugar over time,
some of which might be welcome changes, right?
Reduce sugar cravings, for instance.
And if you're really, really serious
about modulating blood glucose through things like berberine,
the typical dose range, again,
is anywhere from half a gram to 1.5 grams daily.
That's the typical dosages that have been explored.
And there are some other substances like sodium cuprate,
which are known to augment the effects of berberine
via the AMPK pathways.
They basically can increase the ability for berberine
to have its glucose-lowering actions.
But that, of course, is getting into the really potent,
what I would call sharp blade tools
for controlling blood glucose.
And listen, anytime you're dealing with blood glucose,
you are dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel.
And anytime you're dealing
with the brain's preferred source of fuel,
you have to be especially cautious
about depriving the brain of what it needs.
So whether or not you're low carb, high carb,
keto, vegan, carnivore,
these substances like berberine are very, very potent,
and you need to take them seriously.
There is yet another tool for controlling sugar cravings
and the neural circuits that regulate sugar craving
and its downstream consequences.
And this tool is what I would call a high-performance tool,
but it's one that you probably didn't suspect,
and that's sleep.
I've done extensive episodes about sleep,
and we actually have an episode called Master Your Sleep.
You can find that episode easily at HubermanLab.com.
It's available in all the various formats,
YouTube, Apple, Spotify, et cetera,
and provides a lot of tools.
And on social media, I provide a lot of tools.
Often we have a newsletter that provides tools
on how to maximize sleep.
What is the role of sleep in sugar metabolism,
sugar hunger, and the way that the brain
regulates those things?
Well, there's a really exciting study that came out
just last year.
This study was published in the journal Cell Report,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal.
And the reason I love this study so much
is it involved having people,
so yes, this was done in humans,
sleep in the laboratory.
That's not unusual.
There's a sleep lab at Stanford.
There's sleep labs elsewhere.
But what they did was they actually measured
from the breath of these people
and they extracted from their breath
the metabolites that would allow them to understand
what sorts of metabolism was occurring
in these people's bodies at different phases of sleep.
And this is a really remarkable study.
They actually did this every 10 seconds
throughout the entire night.
So in little tiny 10 sec bins,
meaning at very high resolution,
they could evaluate what is the metabolism in the brain
and body that people experience as they go from REM sleep,
rapid eye movement sleep, to slow wave sleep, and so on.
And I'll go deeper into the study again in the future
because it's so interesting and I think so important.
But what they discovered was that each stage of sleep
was associated with a very particular signature pattern
of metabolism and particular phases of sleep
are associated with sugar metabolism
or more with fat metabolism
or more with other aspects of metabolism.
And the reason why I think this study is important
to discuss in the context of today's discussion
about sugar in the brain is that many people
have experienced the effects of disrupted sleep
on their appetite.
And in particular, it's been reported
that when people are sleep deprived
or the quality of their sleep is disrupted,
that their appetite for sugary foods increases.
Now that was always assumed to be
due to some metabolic need
that was triggered by the sleep deprivation
or by the poor sleep.
But in reading over this study,
some of the more important points made by the authors
relate to the fact that, well,
sleep is known to have incredibly important effects
on brain and body for a variety of systems,
immune system, neural functioning, et cetera.
This very organized sequence
of particular forms of metabolism
being active during particular phases of sleep,
which are very, very well orchestrated as we know,
slow wave sleep and REM sleep being orchestrated
in 90 minutes, so-called ultradian cycles
and so on and so forth,
is thought to perhaps set up the brain and body
to be able to regulate itself in the waking hours.
And therefore, when people are sleep deprived
or deprived of certain forms or states within sleep,
such as rapid eye movement sleep,
that it creates a disruption
in a particular set of metabolic pathways.
Now, we don't want to leap too far from this study
to sugar metabolism and the neural circuits
controlling sugar metabolism.
But I will say this,
if you look at the sum total of the data on obesity
or on type two diabetes
or on metabolic syndromes of any kind,
you almost always see disruptions in sleep.
Now, some of those could be due to sleep apnea
caused by even just the size of somebody's neck
or the weight of their body.
In other words, we don't know the direction of the effect.
Metabolic syndromes could disrupt sleep,
which disrupt metabolic syndromes.
And indeed, the authors point out quite appropriately
that they don't understand the direction of the effects
that they observe either.
But there is now a plethora of data pointing to the fact
that getting quality sleep each night
helps regulate not only appetite,
but also the specific forms of metabolism
that drive specific appetites.
So the takeaway is,
while there are extravagant and potent
and interesting ways to regulate blood glucose,
everything from cinnamon to lemon juice to berberine
to sodium caprate to behavioral tools
to the mere understanding of how the direct
and indirect pathways go from the gut to dopamine, et cetera.
If you're not establishing the firm foundation
of proper metabolism,
all of those things are going to be
sort of rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic
as sometimes described.
So we can't overstate the importance of getting regular,
sufficient amount of high quality sleep
at least 80% of the time,
not just for sake of immune system function,
for clear thinking, et cetera,
but also for properly regulating our metabolism,
including our sugar metabolism.
Thank you for joining me for this discussion
about sugar and the nervous system
and how they are regulating each other
in both the brain and body.
If you're enjoying and or learning from this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
Please also subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have comments and feedback or suggestions
for future topics and guests,
please leave those in the comment section on YouTube.
In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's podcast.
That's the best way to support us.
In addition, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
If you're not already following Huberman Lab
on Instagram or Twitter, please do so.
There I cover science and science-based tools
that sometimes overlap with the content of the podcast,
but often is distinct from the content of the podcast.
During today's episode and on many previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab podcast, I discussed supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them.
One issue with supplements is that
if you're going to take them,
you want to make sure that they have
the absolute highest quality.
For that reason, we partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E
because Thorne is partnered, for instance,
with all the major sports teams and the Mayo Clinic.
There's tremendous trust in the fact
that Thorne supplements contain the specific amounts
of supplements that are listed on the bottle
and that the quality of the ingredients they include
are of the very highest standards.
If you want to see the supplements that I take,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman,
and you can get 20% off any of the supplements listed there.
Also, if you navigate further into the Thorne site
through that portal, thorne.com slash U slash Huberman,
you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
Also, if you haven't yet signed up
for the Huberman Lab Neural Network newsletter,
it's a semi-monthly newsletter that includes summaries
of various podcasts, it has some actionable protocols,
it's completely cost-free, you simply provide your email.
We have a very clear privacy policy,
we do not share your email.
If you want to get the newsletter,
you can go to HubermanLab.com, just go to the menu,
you can find the sign up there easily.
You can also see some examples of previous newsletters
without having to sign up at all.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
If that was it for you, why not subscribe to our channel?